Add end user restore documentation (#3045)
codenvy/che-docs: modules/end-user-guide/pages/restoring-a-workspace-from-backup.adoc

:_content-type: CONCEPT
:description: Restoring a Che workspace from a DevWorkspace backup
:keywords: workspace, backup, restore, devworkspace, dashboard
:navtitle: Restoring a workspace from backup
:page-aliases:

[id="restoring-a-workspace-from-backup"]

> = Restoring a workspace from backup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Restoring workspaces from backups
```

> When backup is enabled for {devworkspace} instances on your cluster, workspace data can be captured when a workspace stops.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When backups are enabled for {devworkspace} instances on your cluster, the system captures workspace data when a workspace stops. You can start a new workspace from an existing backup by using the {prod-short} dashboard.
```

Author: Changed to:
```
When backups are enabled for {devworkspace} instances on your cluster, a cron job will backup workspace data for stopped workspaces.
```

> You can then start a new workspace from an existing backup by using the {prod-short} dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> The main purpose of backing up and restoring workspaces is to recover uncommited source code changes, and push them from the restore workspace. Restored workspaces are created with minimal devfiles, and will not be created with the original project's devfile.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Backing up and restoring workspaces allows you to recover uncommitted source code changes. Note that restored workspaces use a minimal devfile rather than the original project devfile.
```

[NOTE]
====

> Backup storage, registry access, and schedules are configured cluster-wide by administrators in the {devworkspace} Operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Administrators configure backup storage, registry access, and schedules cluster-wide in the {devworkspace} Operator. For administrator instructions, see xref:administration-guide:devworkspace-backup.adoc[].
```

> For administrator steps, see xref:administration-guide:devworkspace-backup.adoc[].

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

====

> == Understanding workspace backups

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Workspace backup types
```

> After an administrator enables cluster-wide backups, source code data of stopped workspaces will be backed up in a container image, and automatically pushed to an OCI-compatible registry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After an administrator enables cluster-wide backups, source code from stopped workspaces is backed up in a container image and pushed to an OCI-compliant registry.
```

> *Internal* backups are backups the {prod-short} dashboard detects and lists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Internal backups**: Backups that the {prod-short} dashboard detects and lists automatically. On {ocp}, these are represented as `ImageStream` resources in your namespace.
*
```

> On {ocp}, they are represented as `ImageStream` resources in your namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> *External* backups are backups from a registry not specified by the administrator when cofiguring cluster-wide backups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **External backups**: Backups from a registry not specified during the initial cluster-wide backup configuration.
```

> *External* backups are backups from a registry not specified by the administrator when cofiguring cluster-wide backups.

Reviewer 2: External backups can also be defined by the cluster administrator if not using the built-in registry. This sentence is a bit confusing.

Author: My latest change updates it to the following:
<img width="712" height="188" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b05f2249-7cf3-4442-a183-cad3cce3f6e3" />

This is referring to the `Default registry` (ie, choosing from dropdown, it works for both internal openshift registry and other registries like quay.io) and `External registry` (manually input container image) section in the UI:
<img width="1004" height="365" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/04bf6007-7053-4d9b-aa86-2046b098e309" />

Basically, `External registry` in the UI is not referring registries that are not the internal openshift registry, it's referring to any registry not defined in the `DevWorkspaceOperatorConfig` .

From the dashboard you can:

* Open the list of backups and inspect backup status.
* Restore a workspace from a backup that is already available to you (*internal* backup), or from an image reference you provide (*external* backup).
* Choose compute limits and the editor for the new workspace before you start the restore.

When the restored workspace is ready, the dashboard opens it in a new browser tab.

[NOTE]
====
A restored workspace is created from a minimal devfile with the restored source code being transfered to the workspace from an init container.
The *Devfile* tab in the workspace will not show the original devfile from the workspace's Git repository.
====

> == Viewing backups in the dashboard

Reviewer: Being a procedure, we need a separate file starting here.
For example, proc-viewing-backups-in-the-dashboard.adoc

Content of the file will be: 

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="viewing-backups-in-the-dashboard_{context}"]
= Viewing backups in the dashboard

To inspect the status of your workspace backups, view the list of available backups in the {prod-short} dashboard.

.Procedure

. In the {prod-short} dashboard, click **Workspace**.
. Select the **Backups** tab to view available backups.

.The Backups tab in the Workspace view
image::workspace-backup/backups_tab.png[The Backups tab in the Workspace view of the dashboard,link="{imagesdir}/workspace-backup/backups_tab.png"]

The **Active** tag indicates backups for workspaces that still exist in the cluster. The **Deleted** tag indicates backups for workspaces that have been removed from the cluster.

. In the left sidebar, open *Workspace*.
. Select the *Backups* tab to see available backups.

.The *Backups* tab in the *Workspace* view
image::workspace-backup/backups_tab.png[Backups tab in the Workspace view of the dashboard,link="{imagesdir}/workspace-backup/backups_tab.png"]

The *Active* tag represents backups for workspaces that still exist in the current cluster. Conversely, the *Deleted* tag represents backups for workspaces that no longer exist in the current cluster.

> == Restoring a workspace

Reviewer: Being a procedure, we need a separate file starting here. Based on mod docs guidelines we should not mix content types.
For example, proc-restoring-a-workspace-from-backup.adoc

Content of the file will be:

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="restoring-a-workspace-from-backup_{context}"]
= Restoring a workspace from a backup

You can start a new workspace from an existing backup by using the {prod-short} dashboard. When the restoration is complete, the dashboard opens the new workspace in a browser tab.

.Prerequisites

* Backups are enabled for your cluster.
* You have identified an **Internal** or **External** backup image to use.

.Procedure

. On the **Restore** page, enter a name for the restored workspace.
. Select the backup source:
** **Internal**: Select an `ImageStream` resource from the list.
** **External**: Provide a backup image URL.
+
.Restore mode and backup source selection
image::workspace-backup/restore_section_1.png[Selecting the backup source during restoration,link="{imagesdir}/workspace-backup/restore_section_1.png"]
. Optional: Configure the memory limits, CPU limits, and the editor.
+
.Resource limits and editor selection
image::workspace-backup/restore_section_2.png[Configuring resources and editors for a restored workspace,link="{imagesdir}/workspace-backup/restore_section_2.png"]
. Click **Restore Workspace** and wait for the workspace to start.

[role="_additional-resources"]
.Additional resources

* link:https://github.com/eclipse-che/che-dashboard/pull/1471[Backup and restore DevWorkspaces (GitHub PR #1471)]
* link:https://github.com/eclipse-che/che-dashboard/pull/1478[Resource limits and restore UI improvements (GitHub PR #1478)]
